Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Locus is the trade newspaper in the science fiction field.
1983 marked the 16th year of publication, and Locus has won seven Hugo Awards.
The founder of Locus is Charles Brown, whom we talked with recently.
Here Brown tells us how and why he started Locus and how it has evolved.
I started Locus in 1968.
It started, one of the main reasons I started is because I wanted to be able to learn how to write.
I was a full-time fan, and I could never seem to write anybody a letter.
So I decided if I had myself a deadline at that time, it was every two weeks, I would get some experience with writing.
I'll be able to write letters and things like that.
Well, it's 15 years later.
I still can't write letters.
I can still put out the magazine.
It mainly evolved from being about fandom.
It was done every other weekend.
It was written on Friday, stenciled on Saturday, runoff and mailed on Sunday.
It was always every other weekend.
There was a gang of people in the house helping out, things like that.
And it just kept growing.
The one thing about a magazine is if you keep putting out issues, you get more and more news.
And gradually it changed over more towards the professional side, mainly because that's where my interests were.
And they were the people who responded more often than fast.
And eventually it grew to a point where I couldn't print it anymore.
We went to professional printing and it's been growing ever since.
And it's about the length of a short novel now.
It started out as just one page.
So that's how it grew.
Locus has grown to be a major force in the science fiction field.
We asked Brown if in the early days he ever anticipated that Locus would get to be so important.
Well, no.
It originally started out to only run for two years.
One of the other things it started out was this was an advertisement for the Boston Group.
We were bidding for a world comp.
I just wrote the original and the Boston Group put it out, but that didn't work very well.
At the end of two years they did win the convention.
I think mainly because of Locus.
But then we discovered that we were being nominated for a UGO.
It seemed like it would be interesting to run it right through the Boston convention and try and win a UGO.
Which we did, and after that we just never stopped.
But I never imagined it would grow that much.
Brown worked for many years as an electrical engineer and produced Locus part-time.
Then that changed.
There was a break in the engineering field in 1975.
And I got laid off for the first time in my life.
And I figured while I was waiting for the field to pick up again, I would try writing for the year.
And if I did, I wrote, oh, I wrote mostly non-fiction articles for magazines.
I did Locus on the side and try to build it up as much as possible.
And eventually I discovered I didn't even have to go back to work.
Every once in a while I get a call for an engineering job.
I feel very good about that, but I have no intention of having to go back to school.
One question that naturally springs to mind is, what is the origin of Locus?
Locus is the connecting points in a circle.
And we considered ourselves connecting points to the science fiction professionals, fans, and publishers.
And the other thing was just from the old Spanish phrase of L.O.C., letter of comment.
That's why the letter column is still called Locus with a capital L.O.C.
Join us on our next show when we'll talk more with Charles Brown.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
Stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane.
And Bill Vernon.
Locus is science fiction's leading trade magazine.
It's written for professional writers and for serious readers.
The professionals get information on prospective markets.
The readers get up-to-date information on reviews, conventions, and forthcoming books.
But Locus has its roots in fandom.
Charles Brown, its founder, editor, and publisher,
tells us how he discovered science fiction fandom soon after he began reading science fiction.
Oh, I started reading science fiction.
I was reading Astounding in the 40s.
I discovered fandom all around 1949.
I was finding a convention listed in one of the magazines, Super Science Stories, or something like that.
And they listed a 1950 convention.
And I was 12 years old, and I went to this convention.
I had a wonderful time, and I met all these old men like Fred Cole and Lester Del Rey.
They were all, most of them were pushing 30.
And when you're 12, you don't think anybody's ever going to reach 30.
That's really up there.
And now it's frightening, because I see all these people, and they're considered the same age, pretty much.
But that was how I still was fandom.
And I put out my first fanzine about 1951.
Dropped out again when I was in college and things like that.
And eventually went back to the late 50s.
So Brown has been involved in fandoms since 1950.
We asked him how fandom has changed through the years.
1950, there were all these completely 13-year-old kids, and that was about it.
I was talking to Harlan Ellison today, and he says,
the one thing, he just came back from Australia, he's just a lot of the Australian convention.
It's just like American fandom in the 50s.
There were all these completely 13-year-old kids and no women.
They were all very sincere, very bright, and very socially inept.
They pretty well have fandom, wasn't it?
I think it was.
Annually, Brown conducts the Locus Poll.
The poll is a tally of readers' responses to such topics as favorite novels, short stories, artists, and so on.
And it reveals some personal information as well.
One bit of information is that the average Locus reader seems to be getting older.
Our audience has always gotten older, mainly because the audience has stayed with us.
About 80% of the people who read Locus in 1968 still read Locus, which, of course, keeps raising the ages.
There are some new people, but not that many.
One of the changes, of course, is in the magazine.
The magazine is no longer aimed at teenage fans.
It's aimed at the professionals.
And, of course, that means we attract the older professionals.
I think there are probably no more than two or three professionals who are not described at the moment.
Brown has been publishing Locus for 16 years.
We ask him if he still gets satisfaction from it.
I was looking at the blue lines for the new issue today.
It's very exciting.
The first time you see it come together.
You see all the photographs together.
All the stories in one place instead of pieces.
And you still get a real thrill when you hold that first copy.
I'll get my final copy tomorrow.
I'll be down at the printer at 8:30 in the morning watching it be run off.
I'll pull out a copy myself and staple it together.
And then I'll have another copy.
We'll have more with Charles Brown on our next show.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon and Daryl Lane.
Pick up a copy of Locus, science fiction's leading trade newspaper.
Look inside the front page, and you'll find a small box entitled Editorial Matters.
In the editorial, you'll find, among other acknowledgements,
the names of people who helped collate, fold, and mail the copies of the issue.
We asked Charles Brown, the founder, editor, and publisher of Locus,
to describe how a typical Locus issue is put together prior to mailing.
People who come over to collate Locus, well, it's not collating, it's mailing help.
And we get the issue back from the printer in the afternoon,
and one or two people may show up and help us put stamps on first-class copies.
And then a larger crowd comes in the evening.
You see everybody that's fed dinner and sits around and drinks and puts out, you know,
the little labels on the thing and put them out in order.
And chronological order by zip code.
And they're sacked up, and usually we finish by about 10.30 or 11.
Everybody sits around across the science fiction field.
Very few of the people are what you call fans.
They're almost all writers.
In fact, he had a contest last year for the best first novel by a Locus co-later,
and he did have three nominees.
And as far as I can tell, probably about 90% of the Locuss know it is at least one nominee.
Locuss has grown from a small fanzine to a professionally produced, nearly 50-page-long publication.
We asked Brown if he plans to continue expanding Locuss.
His answer may surprise you.
Actually, I'd like to do the opposite.
I do not want to expand the magazine at all.
If it expands anyway, it always does.
But I have no interest in doing a bigger magazine.
In fact, I find the magazine too big now and circulation too high.
I really want to do a magazine for a limited number of people,
where I can do it all myself at home.
I'm very frightened about getting to the point where I need a large staff and an office and things like that.
Everything is done at home right now.
Some of the changes are always forced on us because there's more news that we feel we have to cover.
As you've probably noticed, we're doing a lot more international coverage lately.
Covering the Soviet Union and European conventions.
And we've had some articles on Chinese science.
And I'm also planning next week to tour, and I'll be at the University of San Francisco.
Locus has caught seven Hugo Awards so far.
Is Brown tiring of winning so many Hugos?
I don't get tired of winning them, no.
It's a lot of fun.
There have been complaints, but they don't get farther with them.
I solve the problem with complaints.
I send Rachel out to pick them up every year.
But I won't say anything as long as people vote for Locus, I'll gladly accept the use
of it.
Locus is a visible presence in the science fiction field.
We asked Brown if it is a target for writers of crackpot letters.
Oh yeah, we get crackpot letters all the time and really strange letters and we usually
try them out.
In years we collected all these really far out letters waiting to publish them on a final
issue.
But it doesn't look like there will ever be a final issue of Locus.
So there's no reason to keep them around anymore.
If you're a serious science fiction fan, you need to be reading Locus.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science
Fiction Association, produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Daryl Lane and Bill Vernon.
The late H. Beam Piper created in this fiction a race of small, furry, sentient creatures called fuzzies.
These cute aliens proved to be very popular with the fans.
Fuzzies figured in only two books, Little Fuzzy and what was later called Fuzzy Sapiens, before Piper died.
But according to Ardath Mayhar, who recently wrote another installment in the Fuzzy saga entitled Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey,
the Fuzzy series did not stop with Piper's death.
Well, Mr. Piper died in 1966, a suicide, which was a very tragic thing.
And he left a considerable literary estate.
He had been writing rather successfully for a long time.
There was sort of a hiatus there for a number of years until one of his friends,
I believe it was Jerry Pournelle, but I'm not certain, persuaded Ace to purchase his literary estate.
All the rights in all of his books and short stories and everything, which they did.
And they reissued Little Fuzzy and Fuzzy Sapiens in a single volume under the fuzzy papers.
And it was very successful.
Had a built-in market of people who remembered the books.
And so they decided that they wanted another book.
So they turned to Mr. William Tuning, who wrote a third book, Fuzzy Bones, which I enjoyed very much.
I based a great deal of the background of my book on the substructure that he had created for their historical background.
After Tuning's effort, Mayhar told us, she was asked to write a fuzzy novel.
Here she tells us why.
I believe it was Susan Allison, who was then the head science fiction editor at Ace,
decided that they wanted a book from the viewpoint of the little aliens.
Well, my editor had just bought paperback rights to my first two Doubleday books.
And she was in the process of putting them into production for Ace.
And she had had a great deal of back-and-forth conversation with my agent, who is still blackstaggered at how fast I am.
And so one day the phone rang, that dear phone.
It was Susan Allison.
She said, would you be interested in writing a book to continue H. Bean Piper's fuzzy series?
Are you familiar with mine?
And I said, yes, I've got my teeth on them.
And she said, well, would you be interested?
We want one from the viewpoint of the aliens.
And she said, I shouldn't say this, but we were kicking it around the office and trying to figure who was extremely fast and partly alien.
And naturally, we thought of you.
Well, I was flattered, you know, because I am both.
So I said, well, I'll tell you what, I will reread the books.
And then I will write whatever feels comfortable so that I know how well I fit into a fuzzy skin.
And you will be able to tell how well you like what I do.
And then we'll go from there.
To write about fuzzies, Mayhar found it necessary to put herself in their place.
This was nearly February.
So I sat down.
And it's a very funny thing.
Becoming an alien is not all that difficult.
But you have to have been a very peculiar child to be able to do it well.
So I remembered when I was two feet tall.
I can remember back before I was two years old.
I remembered how the world looked.
The world is full of shoes and kneecaps, you know.
Everything is tremendous.
Shrubs are trees.
And trees are just something up there like clouds, you know.
So I shrunk myself down to two feet tall and put myself on a world where everything thought I was delicious.
And went from there.
On our next show, we'll hear more from Ardath Mayhar on her writing of Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show, a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.
Coming up next is the Science Fiction Radio Show, so stay with us.
This is the Science Fiction Radio Show, a commentary on science fiction and fantasy.
And here are your hosts.
This is Bill Vernon.
And Daryl Lane.
H. Beam Piper's Fuzzy series was only two books long when he died.
William Tuning wrote a third novel in the series called Fuzzy Bones.
Then Ace Books asked Ardath Mayhar to write a fourth novel.
Her continuation of the series, which came out in 1982, was called Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey,
and it's told from the viewpoint of the fuzzies.
As we learned in our last show, Mayhar used childhood memories to put herself mentally in the place of the two-foot-tall fuzzies.
Mayhar's treatment of the fuzzies diverges quite a bit from the treatments given them by Piper and Tuning, though.
The treatment of the fuzzies in both the Piper and Tuning books is rather peripheral to the human story,
and the fuzzies are given rather short shrift as sort of cutesy-poo creatures.
Okay, Mr. Tuning had set up that they had survived on this totally inimical planet for 1,200 years.
So little helpless big-eyed cutesy-poos don't survive for 1,200 years.
You've got to have pretty bright gritty little cats, or they're not going to make it.
Mayhar also took the approach of answering some of the mysteries at which Piper and Tuning had only hinted.
Well, I had some awfully neat questions to answer that had been set up in the other books
and had never been addressed in those books.
Why did they speak in ultrasonics?
Why, being obviously rational creatures capable of great affection, were they sexually promiscuous?
Oh, there were any number of questions that I had to answer.
It was so funny because as I went, I just turned, okay, this is what they are,
and I turned around and looked, and this is obviously the reason they were that way.
They were sexually promiscuous, for instance, because when their spaceship crashed,
a complement of only some 400 were aboard,
and some half of those were subsequently killed in an earthquake.
So you had a gene pool shared among something around 150 or 200 individuals.
You had to spread your genetic heritage around,
and so this would be a natural outgrowth of assigned breeding as long as they were in the original valley,
and then when they went out, they retained this imperative from their leaders,
you must do this for racial survival.
There were any number of things like that.
One of the reasons Mayhar was asked to write a fuzzy novel was that she could write at such a rapid pace.
Ace needed the book as soon as they could get their hands on it.
Here Mayhar comments on the production of Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey.
Anyhow, they loved what I did.
I loved what I did.
I wrote that book, 100,000 words, in six weeks.
I sat on a wicker stool,
which is now permanently imprinted on my derriere.
My husband would come in.
He would have left me sitting on the stool that morning.
He'd come in that evening and say,
You haven't eaten, have you?
I'd say,
Eaten?
What's eaten?
But it was a lot of fun.
Both the trade edition and the mass market edition of Golden Dream: A Fuzzy Odyssey,
featured the same stunning Michael Whalen cover.
We asked Mayhar if she had any input.
No, but I knew it was going to be beautiful
because Mike Whalen had done the covers for the Piper books and for the tuning book,
and so I knew what he could do.
We wondered if Mayhar would be willing to write another fuzzy novel.
I just wouldn't mind at all writing another one.
They're nice little people.
They really are.
On some of our future shows,
we'll talk more with Ardath Mayhar about her other fiction.
This has been the Science Fiction Radio Show,
a production of the Permian Basin Science Fiction Association,
produced in conjunction with Odessa College in Odessa, Texas.